Topic 1: The Avant-Garde General Counsel
==================================================

Role and responsibility of general counsel There are enough, more and endless reams of conventional wisdom chronicled depicting the roles and responsibilities of a general counsel (GC) in what we term the new-age business environment. Yet the ever-morphing role of a GC is still an unrivalled enigma considering the range of responsibilities and expectations that shadow the role intermittently and circumstantially. The heightened limelight on the role of a GC is also due to the mutating nature of the prism through which society views changing mores that define the doctrine of impropriety for a corporation. The permissibility, the elasticity and longevity of the stigma attached to breaches and the penal provisions attributed to bad conduct in terms of ostracisation have all undergone a massive transformation, and so has the functional responsibility of GCs in the conduct of business. To list and limit a GC's utility to a corporation and its managers who manage the complex corporate machinery is an avoidable endeavour and an exercise in futility, in my view. It is no exaggeration to mention that a GC is a pivot who holds together the troika comprising the board, the shareholders and the business from knowingly or unknowingly drifting beyond their tolerable perimeters. A GC with a deep understanding of jurisprudence, intuitive to make business calls, with an ear to the practices followed by industry peers, can assist the corporation’s CEO to decisively achieve its goals without falling victim to needless interruptions that might undermine a time-sensitive commercial activity. A GC must promptly and responsibly toggle hats to facilitate business on the one hand and, on the other, perform the role of a custodian of law and a conscience-keeper all rolled into one. It is worthwhile for a GC to remain a lawyer at the core and, if necessary, wear a commercial façade responsibly, when called upon to feed such an occasion. It is no secret that business houses are profit and performance-denominated and flourish on an insatiable desire for returns. I firmly believe that a GC must invariably show commercial acumen by co-nurturing the commercial goals of a corporation along with the business managers while unconditionally submitting to a vast cache of non-commercial callings that are cast upon a corporation by national and local laws, regulatory interventions and a series of governance codes prescribed by regulators, institutional investors, lenders and, last but not least, manage public opinion. To remain relevant and being useful to a business environment, a GC must appropriately and effectively, without conflict or prejudice, contribute to a series of multidimensional constituencies that collaborate to seek a common objective. 'A good plan, violently executed now, is better than a perfect plan next week', as General George S Patton, a world-war veteran, said – which would probably be a good scale to measure a GC's value judgement. A key message to my team has always been that paralysis by analysis has no place in modern-day commerce, where time is of the essence to close high-stake deals, particularly when competition is sniffing around to move in. The challenge always is to present oneself as a solution-provider while not falling foul of any interdisciplinary contradictions. It is an delicate tightrope walk between ‘shall we do?’ on the one hand and ‘can we do?’ on the other, if a GC must work on a moral compass provided by the organisation. It is important for the board, aided by a GC, to know that values and valuations have their own place in commerce and at what stage which of the two must gain the upper hand. A GC's responsibility has been amplified in manifold ways with the onset of contemporary canons of doing business such as environmental, social and governance discipline, tighter compliance codes and governance standards. Doctrines such as these have put fetters on the unbridled runway of transacting for profitability with impunity. The unified and rudimentary business goal of profit at any cost as in a typical laissez-faire economy holds no water in the way a 21st-century corporation is expected to conduct itself. Such permissive principles have now faded into oblivion, paving the way to a more transparent, controlled and accountable mode of earning returns in a responsible, ethical and social manner. GCs have the primary role of constantly reminding the business that the philosophy of the end justifying the means is not good enough to be reckoned as a virtue that would log reputational brownie points, earn the respect of the shareholders, stakeholders, regulators and community at large. Institutions that dwell on the philosophy of crony capitalism will seldom enjoy the halo of trust and credibility that any modern-day corporation aspires to earn and wear. A GC is the focal point, working with the board to be an ombudsman and an ethics officer to carry through the message of propriety both in letter and in spirit to bring about the much-needed transformation to achieve such a coveted status. Apart from the well-established virtue for a GC to work with the business as against for the business, GCs should be guarded and cautious while getting too transactional functionally so as avoid the thirst of doing business at any cost. Once an ethical flag is unfurled by the GC for the corporation, it must fly high no matter how bountiful the harvest might be in lowering it. The depth and nature of such responsibility far exceeds any arithmetical quantification by its very nature. Among many other things, a good case in point is the duty for compliance with anti-bribery laws or avoidance of conflicts of interest or litigation management in the conduct of business. These areas are the tip of the functional iceberg, nonetheless. It could be a routine business, a merger or an acquisition or any transaction that leads the corporation to an organic or inorganic growth. Doing clean business and adherence to anti-bribery laws is an area that GCs might have to be diligent and very attentive to. The temptation to corruption and to corrupt is the longest-serving bane among mankind, which is frowned upon by institutions of repute and has zero tolerance these days. Proper checks and balances, adoption of compliance codes, carrying the message of the avoidance of bribery across the corporation, periodic training for staff are all initiatives best performed and dispensed by a GC. It is a GC's solemn duty to escalate these governance mandates into an organisational culture that ought to be embedded into its core fabric. Similarly, GCs must ensure proper checks and balances are adhered to in order to resolve conflicts in the conduct of business with utmost transparency, in letter and in spirit. Conflicts in corporate transactions arise when a person’s self-interest and professional interest lead to outcomes that are based on the foundation of unfair and unethical presumptions. Conflicts and conflicted decisions can bring about reputational risk and expose the corporation to needless litigation and prosecution. At the minimum, a conflicted decision by a corporation is an antithesis to good governance that can tear apart the very fabric of a corporation's good standing. If circumstances demand, a GC must rise above the ordinary to peel the veneer of optical independence that business managers might contrive and overtly wear to cover up an unjust enrichment, personal or for the corporation. Conflicts have no place in modern-day business practice and every GC is duty-bound to make sure such practices find no free passage. Litigation management by a GC is by far the most intense and complex management science. Gone are the days when a GC could mechanically treat provisions pertaining to applicable laws, preferred jurisdiction, construction and utility of an arbitration and mediation provision, all as a routine boilerplate in contracts. GCs begin as law officers performing conventional legal work, with not much of business or managerial role, and over time advance into a GC role, with leadership and other additional responsibilities. Invariably, that is the dream metamorphosis leading to an aspirational career mutation. Ironically, some GCs elect to suffer the nostalgia of wanting to remain a pure lawyer for ever, refusing to mutate. Very many times I get to engage with such GCs and transaction lawyers. No prejudice meant, nothing wrong with such an approach, but it has its attendant limitations when one must cohabit within a corporation or for dealings outside. All will agree that it is not uncommon during M&A negotiations for participants to painfully suffer the needless discordant notes created by lawyers and GCs caught up in prescribing endless rituals for fishing while the business is angling for the fish. In commerce, the lack of a virtue called quick decision-making resulting from a fear of an unknown or deficiency of understanding of the realities can delay and defeat the very purpose of a collaboration, thereby muting opportunities irreversibly. GCs fail to break the ice many a time, wanting to play safe without appreciating the legitimacy of hypothetical legal or regulatory risks lurking around or presented half-heartedly by participants. There is no choice for a proficient GC but to break the gridlock of unknown fears and the consequential stalemate creating artificial roadblocks to commercial success. Conversely, inefficiency could creep in when the functional responsibilities fail to converge into a commonality of purpose, creating internal deadlocks. The problem is compounded when business managers get opportunistic, overlook reason and call out the trump card in what is commonly known as a ‘conscious business call’. If a GC is unable or refuses to expose the fallacy of an ill-conceived business call that suffers innate ailments such as lack of ethics, prudence or illegality that expose the corporation or the board to consequences, then the GC has failed. If you do not decide, you are damned; if you are overzealous in deciding, you are damned too. It is an unsettling tightrope acrobatic, but an inevitable functional responsibility of a GC. Exploring avant-garde terrain Let me now meander a bit into some avant-garde terrains that GCs could and must explore. GCs must routinely unshackle themselves and move out of their functional wraps and rediscover their calling by partnering with the business to create revenue centres as an add-on to their conventional roles of lawyering. The scope and possibility for such an enterprise are infinite and outcomes fertile. Examples of such possibilities are set out below.Regulatory arbitrage The Avant-Garde General Counsel A well-managed regulatory arbitrage that results in commercial paybacks, plus what is known as regulatory entrepreneurship that creates new horizons to explore for a corporation, are cases in point. Conceiving, advising or even managing a legally justifiable regulatory arbitrage with economic leverage to a corporation is well suited for a GC to lead and to pursue, as long as it does not raise ethical questions. Simplistically speaking, there are two characteristics to a regulatory arbitrage. The first is when a device is created to blatantly exploit a loophole to evade an unfavourable regulation or an unfriendly geography, which is most certainly avoidable. Such an attempt could raise legal and ethical questions. The other is where a business case is conceived with due consideration to applicable regulations such that it is permissive and attires the legitimacy cover. Without indulging in the never-ending cat-and-mouse game of rulemaking and rule evading, it is possible to honourably adorn an arbitrage opportunity onto a business plan that is well considered and executed. Such a product can only be a result of a candid collaboration among business managers and legal minds working together to script a monetary gain ethically. It is commonplace for a GC to be faced with a particular transaction structure under consideration turning out to be illegal in one jurisdiction while flawlessly legal in another. A case in point is the task of acquiring a parcel of agricultural land by a corporation in India for commercial use. In some regions, such acquisition is prohibited under regional land reforms laws, while fully legitimate in some others. Such regulatory differences provide an arbitrage advantage. Similarly, provincial stamp duty laws have differential economic consequences, providing ample opportunity to plan and plot the situs for a concluding transaction. In addition, jurisdiction shopping to gain an advantage arising from the stringency or leniency of ease of doing business matrix, complexity of laws and regulations between two jurisdictions or even differential treatment of an identical theme resulting in economic benefits are all perfectly legitimate if treated with caution. Regulatory entrepreneurship While regulatory arbitrage is more of a play with the extant and a tweak in the form of doing business to achieve favourability, regulatory entrepreneurship on the other hand is resource-draining, exploratory and evolutionary and an attempt at reshaping or readjusting the legal environment to suit one’s business goals. Where an integral part of a corporation’s business plan is pivoted on changing a law or a regulation or bringing in reforms to facilitate an otherwise prohibited or regulated business, such an initiative is called regulatory entrepreneurship. These tasks demand a tall order of engagement with lawmakers and regulators and GCs can play an essential role to establish new streams of revenue or flush out bottlenecks to clear out choked streams. Such assignments require collaboration between policymakers at union, state and local levels and more than anything proactive consumers for such products and services who can influence public opinion in legitimising an otherwise grey area of business. It is common knowledge that the taxi-aggregation business across the globe, for example, gained legitimacy over an extended evolutionary time frame. Uber is a case in point – it initiated a continuous engagement across geographies in stages involving a variety of regulators and regulations, lawmakers and consumers. But for such incessant exertion, taxi-aggregation and hailing services built on smartphone apps would have been considered as an illegal business a few decades ago. The sustained fight by mobile phone service providers in India through the courts, media and public opinion in the mid-90s against a fixed licence-fee regime, which resulted in the grant of migration to revenue share by the Ministry of Telecommunications easing the burden to service providers and establishing a sense of viability into the business, is nothing but a work of regulatory entrepreneurship. The Indian telecoms industry saw similar legal battles when the deemed duopoly rights of the mobile licensees were challenged by the entry of government as a third operator in certain geographies. Innumerable strategic legal battles in various forums were fought on the jurisprudence of level playing field and legitimate expectation. GCs of various private telecoms operators and independent lawyers played a humongous role in bringing about path-breaking reforms in the Indian telecoms sector, completely redefining the economics and the edifice of the Indian telecoms industry. These are game-changing assignments where GCs and the legal community have demonstrated great commercial outcomes by bridging law with business. GC role classification Customarily speaking, a GC's role can be categorised into two classes for ease of reference: first, a conventional role and second, an unconventional role. Conventional roles are commonly chronicled and easy to recall. They are broadly predictable in nature as regards the  industry category a GC is associated with. Responsibilities include, inter alia, contracts management, routine compliance, board governance and safeguarding against prosecution, litigation management, supporting the corporation's organic and inorganic growth through mergers and acquisitions, intellectual property rights management and protection, employment issues and advising various business heads on the core business activity on a day-to-day basis. Such work content manifests around the nature of the business at play and the interplay of various laws and regulations that have a bearing on the corporation. For example, a manufacturing business will have a series of pieces of labour and factory legislation to adhere to, while a banking business will have to observe laws that specifically govern the sector and comply with various prudential norms prescribed by the sector regulator, the Reserve Bank of India. Similarly, a pharmaceutical, food and drink or insurance company will all have their own respective collection of responsibilities under applicable special legislation monitored by regulators under whose supervision the industry has to conduct its business. Unconventional roles, for instance, are non-recurring and are usually unpredictable. It could be issues that are once in a lifetime, a steep crisis management or a high-profile commercial assignment drawing the attention of everyone, or a project that revolves around a regulatory arbitrage or regulatory entrepreneurship, as discussed above. Quite often, a GC's role in defusing or managing a perilous crisis goes unnoticed in the swamp of complexities. Some of these crises could be so strangulating that they might make or unmake an organisation. Controversial blow-ups and unpredictable challenges arrive unannounced in the journey of a corporation. Every occurrence is autonomous, has its own surprises and must be addressed differently with different prescriptions. Events could have their genesis in human errors, human frailties or even reasons beyond human control. Whether managing the menace of the Y2K bug, which was a bane as we ushered in the 21st century, or facing the legal fallout of the covid-19 pandemic, GCs have managed the challenges and demonstrated the ability to shoulder the responsibility from a functional perspective. An automobile conglomerate faced with prosecution and public rage for manipulating emission norms to hedge technology costs, a food and beverage player having to recall stocks of food products for botched food safety standards or mislabelling across a large geography and having to face regional-level prosecution simultaneously, or a corporation that is faced with a large-scale financial irregularity are all situations where a GC has to bring forth a high level of jurisprudential acumen, statesmanship and leadership skills to manage and troubleshoot multidimensional interventions and fallouts. Defending prosecutions, managing the legal aspects of product recalls, defending prosecuted executives and dealing with risk and reputation management all concurrently are a herculean task and hard to define. The age of disruption is here to stay. Trade wars, business redundancy, pandemic, commercial xenophobia, nationalism in commerce, the never-ending hunt for a perfect business plan, new revenue streams, geopolitical realignment among nations and consequential disruptions in the ease of doing business matrix of a particular jurisdiction, both domestic as well as cross-border, relationship management and early resolution of deadlock in adversarial situations call for good planning and vision to resolve differences amicably rather than obstinate enthusiasm to contest. The jurisprudence of liability, responsible investing, privacy, right to information and new-age transparency laws and anti-money laundering laws are all part of the endless themes a GC must be on top of, day in and day out. The art and science of all this are to manage the right mix of preventive and defensive strategies in consultation with the board and appropriate experts. Summing up, a GC's role cannot and must not be itemised and limited. As a counsel, a compliance and ethics officer and a business call champion, a GC's responsibility cannot be bound by barriers that define the role. Technical skills on the bedrock of gravitas laced with experience and proven wisdom can go a long way in holding the corporate fort during the sunny and stormy days of a corporation’s existence. As a caretaker and a responsibility officer, a GC should learn to decipher right and wrong, decisively and in a timely manner, and facilitate the free movement of the wheels of a corporation in compliance with the laws of the land to be effective and successful.